 download current version from mongo db website

 click next next next and install

 this PC - C DRIVE- PROGRAM FILE

 mongo db- server-8.0- bin

 Window - edit environmental - environmental variables - path - new - paste path in second box , and then click ok

 click on bin and copy path , then click windows and go to environment - environment

 Chrome , new window - mongo db shell , go to first website - package (mi) , download,Next next next nd finish

 Windows+ D

 Mongo db on screen and do next next and finish

 Then open command prompt and type

 mongod   - - version

 Open new command prompt

 Type Mongosh

 Type show dbs

 db.createCollection("Students")

 use Kavin

 db.createCollection(“employee”)

 Show dbs


What is MongoDB?
MongoDB is a NoSQL, document-oriented database designed for flexibility and scalability. Unlike traditional relational databases that use tables and rows, MongoDB uses collections and documents. Each document is a JSON-like structure, making MongoDB highly flexible in terms of schema design. It is well-suited for handling large volumes of unstructured or semi-structured data, and its distributed architecture allows it to scale horizontally across many servers.

Key features of MongoDB:

NoSQL Database: MongoDB is schema-less, allowing dynamic changes to data models.
Scalability: It can handle large volumes of data with features like sharding and replication.
Document-Oriented: Data is stored in BSON format (Binary JSON), making it easy to map to objects in code.
High Performance: Optimized for read and write throughput, making it suitable for high-demand applications.
Let me know if you need more details!



Basic NoSQL Commands in MongoDB with Example Output:
1.Show Databases:

show dbs
Output:
admin   0.000GB
config  0.000GB
local   0.000GB

2.Create or Switch to a Database:

use myDatabase
Output:
switched to db myDatabase

3.Create a Collection:

db.createCollection("users")
Output:
{ "ok" : 1 }

4.Insert a Document into a Collection:

db.users.insert({name: "John", age: 30})
Output:
WriteResult({ "nInserted" : 1 })

5.Find Documents in a Collection:

db.users.find()
Output:
{ "_id" : ObjectId("..."), "name" : "John", "age" : 30 }

6.Update a Document:
db.users.update({name: "John"}, {$set: {age: 31}})
Output:
WriteResult({ "nMatched" : 1, "nModified" : 1 })

7.Delete a Document:
db.users.remove({name: "John"})
Output:
WriteResult({ "nRemoved" : 1 })


Steps for Installing MongoDB on Windows:
Download MongoDB: Visit the MongoDB Download Page and download the Community Server version for Windows.
Run the Installer:
Open the downloaded .msi file.
Follow the setup instructions, ensuring you select “Complete” installation.
MongoDB as a Service:
Select “Run MongoDB as a Service” so that MongoDB starts automatically when the system boots up.
Install MongoDB Compass (Optional):
MongoDB Compass is a GUI tool to interact with MongoDB. You can choose to install this during the setup or skip it.
Set up the MongoDB Environment:
MongoDB stores data in the C:\Program Files\MongoDB\Server\{version}\data folder by default.
Start MongoDB:
By default, MongoDB runs as a Windows service.
To start MongoDB manually, open a command prompt and run:
bash
Copy code
mongod
MongoDB Shell:
Open a new command prompt, type mongo, and press enter to start the MongoDB shell.

